Added a guide for making models using Blockbench (#16)
DenizenScript/Denizen-Beginners-Guide: source/guides/non-denizen/3d-models.md

Resource Packs - 3D Models and Advanced Implementation
----------------------------------------

> This page will provide some examples and guides to how to utilize the program Blockbench to create custom 3D items for use in your own projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page will provide some examples and guides on how to utilize the program Blockbench to create custom 3D items for use in your own projects.
```

> This guide assumes you already have a basic resource pack file structure and will primarily focus on the step by step process of creating a model using Blockbench, creating a namespace, and finally implementing it using Denizen with up to date info for modern Minecraft verisons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide assumes you already have a basic resource pack file structure and will primarily focus on the step by step process of creating a model using Blockbench, creating a namespace, and finally implementing it using Denizen with up to date info for modern Minecraft versions.
```

```eval_rst
.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :local:
```

### Namespaces and Filepaths

Assuming you already have a basic resource pack with an `.mcmeta` file and an `assets` folder, inside the `assets` folder is where all of your `Namespaces` live. A `Namespace` is a kind of directory that Minecraft uses to organize resource and data packs.

> For example, all of the Minecraft textures and models will be prefixed in-game with the following Namespace `minecraft:wooden_sword`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, all of the Minecraft textures and models will be prefixed in-game with the following Namespace:  `minecraft:wooden_sword`. 
```

> You can see the namespace being the first part before the colon, being `namespace:item`. In the above, it sees the `minecraft` part being the folder it needs to look for in the Resource Pack. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The namespace is the part before the colon, In the example above, this is `minecraft`:wooden_sword, and so it looks for the 'mincraft' folder in the Resource Pack.
```

You can easily create your own namespace by simply making a new folder under the `assets` directory. We'll be using the namespace of `example` for our purposes today.

Your filepath will look like this: `.minecraft/resourcepacks/ResourcePackName/assets/example`

> The reason you would want to use your own namespace is mostly organizational, since otherwise all of your custom models would be located in the `minecraft` namespace folder, which could get confusing when trying to debug issues. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You want to use your own Namespace primarily for organizational reasons, since otherwise all of your custom models would be located in the `minecraft` namespace folder, which could get confusing when trying to debug issues. 
```

- `cooking:ingredients/butter`
- `cooking:food/bacon_cheeseburger`

You can do this by creating a folder inside the `Items` folder.

You'll end up with a filepath of: `.minecraft/resourcepacks/ResourcePackName/assets/example/items/subfolder`

Namespaces are comprised of the simple file structure:
- Items - What is registered to Minecraft
- Models - What is referenced in the Items folder
- Textures - What is referenced for texturing in the Models folder

#### Items Folder

This folder is where Minecraft registers custom items and their default model behaviors. The `.json` files inside this directory are the exact names of what will be registered in-game for usage in your custom items.

If you create a file in the folder called `hamburger.json` you will register an item with the namespace key of `example:hamburger`.

Keep in mind that this `.json` file can actually be called something else than what your model file is called.
For basic models, it's a good idea to reuse the same name for your model so you don't get confused easily.

> ##### Example file `new_model.json`

Reviewer: Do the backticks render into a code snippet in a header?

Author: I'm gunna be honest, I don't know what this means.

Author: Yes it does, I based most of my formatting off of Behr's resource-packs.md guide which it does render them as code snippets.

Here is what the inside of a most basic `.json` file looks like in the Items folder:

```json
{
   "model": {
   "type": "minecraft:model",
   "model": "example:new_model"
   }
}
```

> You can see that it points the `model` key towards the `example:new_model`. With the `new_model` being the `.json` file for our model located in the `models` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see that it points the `model` key towards `example:new_model`. With `new_model` being the `.json` file for our model located in the `models` directory.
```

### Blockbench

Time to make some models.

For this tutorial, we'll be doing a step-by-step simple guide to make a model using Blockbench.

You'll want to install Blockbench by following the link to the [official website](https://www.blockbench.net/downloads) and installing it properly, following the instructions provided by the installer.

#### Creating a Model

To get started making a model for Java Minecraft that will be used by your Resource Pack, click `File` at the top toolbar, then select `New`.

Specifically select `Java Block/Item`. Otherwise, the Blockbench exporter will not produce a `.json` file recognized by Minecraft.

You will want to enter the `File Name` section with the name of your model. This will directly provide the output file with the correct name.

`IMPORTANT NOTE`: Do not use any capitalization or spaces in the file name. Minecraft files only rely on alphanumeric characters and underscores. `(a-z, 0-9, _)` 
If you want to separate your words, use an underscore (_) in your file name.

For our guide, we'll be making a chair for use in furniture with an associated Denizen script later on to implement it directly in-game.

> If you wish to follow along, name your model `fancy_chair`

Reviewer 2: missing period

Once you have your model started, you will be left with an empty plane. 

#### Cubes

To add anything onto your model, you will need to add a `Cube`. These are the direct building blocks that make up any model.

Navigate over to the `Outliner` on the right side of the program. This is the table of contents, where you can easily select any cubes or groups you may have.

However, you currently have no cubes or groups. To add one, select the `Plus Symbol` to add an `Element`.

This will place a `2 x 2 x 2` cube into the model. 

The default size that Minecraft allows to fit in a single block's space is `16 x 16 x 16`. So keep this in mind if you want your model to fit well with what you plan to use it for.

> Cubes in Blockbench are measured in Pixels. The max size that Blockbench allows for is a `48 x 48 x 48` space. This means that you can make models that are larger than a single Minecraft block. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cubes in Blockbench are measured in pixels. The max size that Blockbench allows for is a `48 x 48 x 48` space. This means that you can make models that are larger than a single Minecraft block. 
```

This can be useful for making models that take up multiple blocks instead of making multiple models for the same purpose.

> You can name each of the cubes you have by `Right Clicking` it in the `Outliner` and selecting `Rename`. The default keybind for this is `F2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can name each of the cubes you have by right clicking it in the `Outliner` and selecting `Rename`. The default keybind for this is `F2`.
```

#### Groups

> For organizational purposes, `Groups` are very useful, so you don't end up with your model entirely composed of parts with the default name of "cube" and not knowing what goes where.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For organizational purposes, `Groups` are very useful, so you don't end up with your model entirely composed of parts with the default name of "cube" and not know what goes where.
```

This is important so you do not end up with a model facing the wrong direction when it comes to your usage. However, this is entirely on a case-by-case basis; if it does not matter what direction your model will be seen from, then simply ignore this.

#### Resizing

To fully make the legs of our chair, you will want to lengthen the cubes.

To make this a simple model, we'll be using increments of 2 pixels each. We now have our chair legs with a size of `2 x 6 x 2`

This length is important because we'll want to create a new group called `Seat` and add a cube to it to place on top of our legs. And since this new seat is 2 pixels thick as well, our model now has a total height of 8 pixels.

8 pixels is also the same size as a slab in Minecraft. Which is also exactly the height at which most `sit` or `mount` commands, in Denizen, place the player at. 

We'll now want to make a new group called `back`; this will be the back of the chair. Add a cube to this new group.

> Making this also 8 pixels in height means we now have a total height of 16 pixels, which is the max height of a standard Minecraft Block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making this also 8 pixels in height means we now have a total height of 16 pixels, which is the max height of a standard Minecraft block.
```

![](images/model_demo_resize.png)

#### Texturing

Now that we have a model, we could technically export this to our resource pack and continue with the guide, however currently there are no textures on the model. It will show up in-game as black and purple checkerboard.

To add textures to your model, you will want to import some from the `Textures` section on the left pane of the program.

> This is where, if you have any art skills, you can create your own texture UV maps for your model, but the easiest thing you can actually do is just to reuse vanilla Minecraft's textures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where, if you have any art skills, you can create your own texture UV maps for your model, but the easiest thing to do is just to reuse vanilla Minecraft's textures.
```

This means that you don't have to be skilled at art to create your own custom 3D models.

> However, you will likely want to extract all of Minecraft's Textures for your usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you will likely want to extract all of Minecraft's textures for your usage.
```

> ##### Getting Textures

Reviewer 2: This section either need some enhancements or you can rely on the (updated) Resource Packs Guide as it's already explained to some degree [here](https://guide.denizenscript.com/guides/non-denizen/resource-packs.html#tips-tricks-and-notes-while-you-create).

> There are a few hosted copies of Minecraft's textures online, but the easiest way to obtain them is to extract them yourself.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe the first part should be mentioned. Minecraft EULA clearly states that you are not allowed to redistribute game files and assets.

Follow this step-by-step process:
1. Locate your `.minecraft` folder
2. Enter the `versions` folder
3. Locate your current Minecraft Jar, like `26.2.jar`

> 4. Use an extraction program like `7-ZIP` to extract the jar to your desired directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Extract the jar to your desired directory
```

It might be a good idea to pin this folder to Quick Access so you can grab it quickly later.

##### Applying Textures

Now that you have the textures folder, you will want to import it into Blockbench. On the `Textures` section, select `Import a Texture`. This will open your file browser. You'll want to find where you stored your Minecraft textures.

`IMPORTANT NOTE`: Reminder, due to the `1.21.2` update, you cannot cross the atlases for textures. So if you want to use textures from the `Blocks` folder, you cannot also use textures from the `Items` folder.

A few textures we will use for this project are as follows:
- `stripped_oak_log`
- `stripped_dark_oak_log`

Using Minecraft's textures like this also preserves the filepaths of the texture, meaning it can perfectly grab the texture.

Keep in mind that this also applies any changes to the texture based off any other resource pack you might have installed. Meaning your model might render differently if a player has their own resource pack.

The easiest way to apply a texture is simply by dragging the texture from the side directly to the Cube you want to texture. This will place the texture onto the single face of the Cube. 

> This may take a while and be tedious to apply for each face of the Cube; an easier way exists: hold `SHIFT` when you let go of it. This will apply it to all faces of the Cube.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may take a while and be tedious to apply for each face of the Cube; an easier way exists: hold shift when you let go of it. This will apply it to all faces of the Cube.
```

![](images/model_demo_texturing.png)

Another important thing to double check on your textures is the filepath of the texture. 

To make sure Minecraft finds the texture in the right location, right click on the texture in the outliner, then click `Properties`.

This should show the data of the texture file in Blockbench. Make sure that the namespace is set as `minecraft` and that the folder is correct for where the texture is from.

If Minecraft is unable to find the file, then it will show up as bright purple and black boxes. This is useful to know in case one of your textures is incompatible or the filepath is incorrect.

##### UV Mapping

You can move the UV of each face of your texture by moving the selection boxes in the `UV` section above `Textures`. 

This allows you to grab certain bits of the texture for your model for uses like:

> - Connecting Wood Grains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Connecting wood grains
```

- Grabbing interesting parts
- Forming solid pieces out of multiple cubes

##### Detail Work

Now that we have a solid, simple model, we can get a bit fancy or fix any issues that arose.

Let's try adding a cushion to the chair by selecting the seat and copying it. You now have a second cube of the same size. 

> Move it up `2 Pixels` so it's on top of the seat. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Move it up 2 pixels so it's on top of the seat. 
```

Select the `Resize` tool and shrink it down to `9.5 x 0.25 x 7.75`
Center it in the seat by adjusting its position.

We now have a cube slightly raised from the seat. Import the texture `red_wool` and apply it to all faces. This gives us a nice cushion for the seat. 

We can do something similar to the back end by using additional tools.

Select the `Knife` tool and click on the back.
Cut it `Horizontally` to split the Cube into two sections.
Repeat it `Vertically` on the new bottom sides.
Select the new `Middle` section of the back.
Shrink it inwards so there's now a depression in the backrest.

> You can also `Retexture` the new edges of the backrest in a different wood to give the chair a more visual edge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also `Retexture` the new edges of the backrest in a different type of wood to give the chair a more visual edge.
```

![](images/model_demo_detail.png)

#### Display

> Another important thing to consider is how the model will be rendered to the player, either in the Inventory or in the player's hands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another important thing to consider is how the model will be rendered to the player, either in the inventory or in the player's hand.
```

This will bring up your file explorer and ask you where to save the new model. Navigate to the namespace you created and save it in the `models` folder. 

We now have a proper model saved; however, we will want to make sure we have a relevant `items` file for our new model so it can be used properly in-game.

```json
{
   "model": {
   "type": "minecraft:model",
   "model": "example:fancy_chair"
   }
}
```

Copying the above should suffice, as we have the file name the same as when we exported it.

### Denizen

We now have a model and a resource pack with the model registered, and we plan to use it in-game for our project.

Implementation can go in quite a few different ways. Still, we will want to register this directly as an item through Denizen so that players can hold it.

```dscript_green
fancy_chair:
    type: item
    material: brick
    display name: <white>Fancy Chair
    mechanisms:
        item_model: example:fancy_chair
```

Using the Denizen Mechanism `item_model`, we can directly set the item model to the one we registered in our resource pack above. 

It's simply that easy to get your model in-game. No need to fight with data packs or item components. 

> You'll likely want to create a way to obtain your item, such as a `recipe` or a custom `shop` using villagers or other methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll likely want to create a way to obtain your item, such as a recipe or a custom shop using villagers or other methods.
```
